Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by two guests. We have here
with us Doctor Miguel Segundoartin. He's a Ramon Icahal
research fellow in the philosophy department at the University
of Murcia in Spain and a member of the
Minimal intelligence lab or Mint lab there. And we
also have Doctor Vicente Raja. He's a postdoctoral researcher
at the MIT lab, uh, and a research fellow
at the University of Murcia as well. And they
are both authors of ecological Psychology, the book we're
going to talk about today. So, Doctor Artin and
Doctor Raja, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone.
Thank
you so much. So let's start with perhaps the
most basic question, I guess. What is ecological psychology?
Uh, WELL, this is, this is the The question
we in some ways we try to develop in
the book, uh, ecological psychology can be seen as
an approach to To understand perception and action so
these aspects of of psychology that has to do
with how how we come to know about our
environment through our senses and how we are able
to organize our behavior with respect to that right
at the same time some people think that it
can be expanded to other uh fields of of
uh of uh psychology to other faculties, you know,
to, to, to other capabilities. And generally speaking, as
a, let's say as a scientific paradigm is uh
is an alternative way to do psychology or to
do experimental psychology if you compare it to cognitive
psychology, which is the mainstream dominant uh paradigm, uh,
that, you know, it posits some. Different ideas on
how we should approach uh um human psychology and
animal psychology at least.
And I mean, uh, when it comes to a
broader view of psychology, what aspects of psychology does
it apply to or does it apply to all
aspects of psychology?
Um, WELL, I wouldn't, I wouldn't say necessarily all
aspects of psychology, so I don't think that's any.
Ecological psychologists believe that uh ecological psychology can offer
a theory of everything, again, theory of all aspects
of morcognition. But what is true is that if
you take seriously the principles of ecological psychology and
unless, unless you believe that perception action are enclosed,
so unless you believe in a highly modular theory
of cognition in, in which theory of an action
are just modules that are isolated from other faculties,
it means that, unless you believe that, I mean.
Uh, IF you don't believe that, then it means
that the principles you apply, uh, to explain perceptual
action from an ecological perspective should apply also to
other co faculties. So, I mean, for example, the
non-brain syncentrism, the embodied approach, the idea that the,
actually your, your interaction with the environment, your embodied
interaction with the environment changes the cognitive process and
makes it possible that some cognitive activities appear or
emerge in some systems. For example, the, the idea
that uh you interact with rich information, so you
don't need to uh make uh internal inferences or
internal models of the, of the environment. Also the
mathematical tools used to explain in cognition, for example,
in Ecodega psychology, the use of uh dynamical systems
theory or the use of time series analysis. So
there are, I, I, I believe there are consequences
for how you explain or how you understand the
mind and cognition outside of perception and action if
you already are an ecological psychologist.
Right. And later on, we're going to get into
how it applies to perception and action and also
into a little bit into an embodied cognition and
dynamical systems theory. But for now, let me ask
you uh uh another thing. So, uh, would you
like to tell us a little bit about the
history of ecological psychology that is something that you
also go through in the book? I mean, how
did the discipline develop?
Yeah, um, I think it's an interesting history actually.
I, I, I refer to it, uh, as the,
as, um, the last instance or, or, or, or
one of the latest instances of the other psychology.
If you see the, the typical roots of psychology
as a science since it, since it started. Um,
IN the last part of the 19th century, you
see, you know, it's like, it's bound and James,
structuralism, functionalism, and then behaviorism takes it all until
the 50s, 60s, especially, you know, where the cognitive
revolution happens. And we are still within that cognitive
psychology. We know, uh, the, the particular paradigms change
like we talk now more about the Bayesian brain
and that kind of thing, right? But it's still
within the, the context of a cognitive psychology. But
if you explore history. Uh, THERE'S has always been
an alternative. Psychology. So some different ways to do
psychology that run parallel to the mainstream that are
small, right? But they are still there. And I
think ecological psychology is one of them and you
can trace it back to, to William James, actually
to some of the, some of the things William
James uh postulates in the principles of psychology, but
also later on in his essays of in in
radical empiricism. Uh, THERE'S a fantastic book by Harry
Heft called Ecological Psychology in a context that explores
all this in very, very, uh, nice, uh, uh,
detail, but, you know, like, uh, James Gibson that
along with the Leonard Gibsons are the two founding
figures of the, of the disciplines. James Gibson got
his PhD in the 1920s in um uh Princeton
under the mentorship of IB Holt. That considered himself
a radical empressist and was himself a student of
of William James. So there's a very clear historical
root there and then what James Gibson was trying
to do again along with Eleanor Gibson, um, was
trying to develop a kind of a scientific theory
of radical empiricism, right? And Many things happened there,
right? Uh, ONE very important thing is that, uh,
James Gibson was recruited by the US Army to
teach pilots uh on how to land and in
trying to develop resources to do so he understood
that the classical psychophysics experiment on, on experiments on
uh perception didn't work and so he needed to
explore other, other. Alternative to actually uh uh provide
some tools that actually work in how um pilots
learn, right? So in that, that happens during, during,
during the 40s, he writes his, his, his first
book in the 1950s, still kind of in the
mainstream side of things, but already with some tweaks.
And in, in his second book in 1966, uh
he is already very well into. Uh, THE ecological
approach basically rejecting, uh, two main ideas, right? The,
on the one hand, the idea that uh stimulation
is poor, right? That, that, that we don't get
uh information enough through our senses as to guide
our behavior so we need to enrich it internally
somehow. And that visual perception starts with the retinal
image, right? That we have some kind of small
picture of uh the world in, in our retina
and then uh we manipulate it until, until, uh,
it, it serves us to know our environment, right?
Uh. At the same time, Eleanor Gibson is already
taking care of the, of, of, of perceptual learning
development has a book in 1969, right? So there
are a few things there. And Things evolve until
James dead uh right after he published or uh
or around the time he published his last book
in 1979, and then there's a group of few
psychologists uh that take over that enterprise during the
80s, the 190s, and now. So that's kind of
the, a rough sketch of how things developed.
Yes, of course, we don't have uh enough time
to go into much detail here. But uh let
me ask you still on the same topic, how
does ecological psychology relate to other schools of psychology
like Gestalt psychology, phenomenology, and behaviorism?
Yeah, well, that's, that's certainly part of the, of
the history that Vicente was telling, right? So, first
of all, I mean, we need to understand that
uh both James and E Gibson that they studied
as Partly as behaviorists, partly as guesttal psychologists because
they were, there were, they were the main uh
part in psychology when they started in the, in
the 20, in the 20s and, and 30s, right?
So they both studied under the uh under the
mentorship of uh behaviorist. James in the case of
Evie Hall, which is a strange behaviorist more probably
closer to uh James radical um radical impre than,
than probably behaviorism, but Edie Holt actually considered himself
a behaviorist of sorts. Um, uh, Eleanor Gibson and,
and the the mentorship of Clark Hall, which is
actually uh one of the Uh, most recognized behavior
figures. The thing with behaviorism is, uh something that
we say, we try to say in the book
even though we don't have time, we don't have
space because a very short book is that behaviorism
is, is not a molytic thing. It's very difficult
to speak of behaviorism as a, as one thing.
I mean, the behaviorism of Watson is not the
same as the behaviorism of Skinner, not the same
as Tollman, not the same as, as Halls, not
the same as Thorndykes, yada yada. So. It's difficult
to, uh, to pinpoint one single behaviorist theory to
which ecological psychology is indeed, but it's clear that
uh both James and, and Eleanor Gibson recognize themselves
as, uh, uh. Behaviorist of some, of some kind
and actually in the, in the autobiography of Gibson,
he mentions that he's a something I was a,
a behaviorist like Holt and uh Eleanor was a
Hallen uh behaviorist and then actually the ideas of
behaviorism that that remains in the ecological tradition. Uh,
THEN there's Gestalt, there's obviously, I mean, uh, I
think that Gibson, uh, did his PhD on, on
Gestalt, right, didn't, so he was, his PhD was
trying to criticize. Uh, SOME ideas of, of Gestalt,
but there are some ideas of Galt that also
stayed in the ecological approach. For example, and in
the book, we, we say that this idea that
information is structured and the idea of uh, of
uh energy arrays is actually a Gestalt idea. The
difference that uh James Gibson didn't believe that information
or uh uh structure wasn't inside. He thought that
the structure was outside and we could actually access
this. So this is kind of a realist twist.
To, to Gestalt. And there's the last element which
is uh phenomenology, which is probably the most elusive
in a way because it's difficult to find real
references or, or precise reference to um phenomenology in
the, in the ecological tradition unless in the early
ecological tradition, the one by, by Eleanor and, and
James Gibson. But there are some others like, for
example, Semiro and Koer who actually say that there
is evidence that James Gibson read, for example, Merlo
Ponti's uh pheromology of Perception, which is actually a
book in, uh, in the philosophical tradition in phenomenology
that um emphasized the role of the body in
how we experience the world. So there's probably a,
a connection there or, or some, some sort of,
of um friendship uh that James Gibson detected there
with the phenological tradition too. Now, and we speak
now of uh contemporary ecological psychologists. There is a,
a lot of uh um work of current ecological
psychologists looking at the phenomenology, for example, like Tony
Semero is a, is a good example of, of
uh an ecological psychology figure that tried to bridges,
uh, phenomenology, especially Heidegger and Merlo Ponti with uh
contemporary ecological psychology.
Right. So, let me ask you now a little
bit about perception and action, because in the book,
you actually focus on ecological psychology as an approach
to perception and action. But before we get into
this specifically and how it applies there, what are
the main theories of perception and action that we
have apart from ecological psychology?
Um, I guess from, from From our point of
view, from the view from the view from here,
so to speak, from, from the, from the ecological
approach, there's basically one with little variations, right? Uh,
AND the one is the one that has to
do with cognitive psychology, right? Uh, THAT basically tells
you a story about something like an input output
system, right, in which you get the input. Again,
it reaches your retina in case of, of, of
visual perception, right? And it goes inside and, and
it's kind of, you know, that input which is
this, the stimulus is somehow not good enough as
to support a proper perception of the environment. So
internally somehow, and we will bracket this because that
somehow can mean different things. Uh, IT gets enriched,
enriched, manipulated, uh, changed, reshaped to the point that
now we have an internal model, a mental representation
of the external. Environment that is very difficult in
some ways, right, at least in the, in the,
in the relevant ways and that then can be
used to To to be uh retrieved by another
part of the brain and then the that other
part can execute or can send some motor commands,
say, right, as for the body to move in
such and such a way given that the environment
is that way that's kind of the input output
uh system with. Cognition in the center and perception
and action being part of that uh central system
that basically uh are in, are in the business
of constructing a verical model of the environment. And
how it can be done, it can be kind
of bottom up, you know, that you just retrieving
more and more information and mixing it with memory,
past experience to do so. It can be in
a predictive way, right, with a generative model and
just trying to, to shape. That model in such
a way that actually reflects the latent variables of,
of, of, of, of uh stimulation, right? But that's
it. That's the thing that happens inside and it's
in the business of building up a model of
the environment such that that model can be used.
Uh, uh, AS a, as a reference to execute
actions.
Uh, AND what are some of the most important
concepts to understand perception and the action from the
perspective of ecological psychology?
Well, I would say that the most important one
is something that we try to, to emphasize in
the book is the notion of information. So for
us, the real game changer that ecological psychology brings
up and brings you to um psychology is information.
So if you believe that there is actually rich
information in the environment in the structure of the
light or instructural sound or in, in, in, in
your skin intact. Then the richer the information there
is outside. So the more possibility you have to
gather information, the less you need to build it
inside. So that's, this is the main idea of
ecolega psychology. So if internal models were introduced as
an explanatory posit to compensate for the Uh, impoverishment
for the poverty of the stimulus. If you don't
think that the stimulus is that poor, so you
think the stimulus is rich, then it seems that
you don't need the second explanatory step of positive
internal models. So for us, the real game changer
is the notion of information. And then the, the
second idea I think is the notion of embodiment.
And it means two different things. Well, you perceive
that, so you gather the information, you perceive the
world through your body. So the fact that you
have this specific body means that you will occupy,
for example, some point of views, like taller or
shorter, whatever, but also it means that you can
explore this information. So you have to move, you
can generate new information, you can discover invariant properties.
In this information, etc. So, uh, real life exploration
with your body is an essential aspect of how
you perceive the environment. And it's something that you
see in, in, in nature, right? So, when people
are, or when animals, for example, are unsure about
uh relative distance, for example, they move to generate
motion parallax. So moving actually is an, a strategy
to perceive distance in this case, right? And then
the Probably the, the, the third most important concept,
I don't know if you disagrees, we probably have
affordances, which is a concept that was introduced by
ecological psychologists. Nowadays it is used in many other
paradigms because in a way, affordances are not necessarily
conceptually tied to ecological psychology. So affordances are opportunities
for interaction and as such, they can be accommodated
in different frameworks, but what ecological psychologists believe is
that Through detected information, you perceive affordances. I mean,
through detected information, you are able to visual to
perceive, not visual, right, you're able to perceive what
you can do in the environment. For example, how
you can control your behavior to get to um
catch the bottle or avoid an obstacle or um
Uh, duck, uh, uh, you know, in, in a,
in a fist fight, whatever. So, for me, those
are probably the three most important concepts. I don't
know if Vicente would add any other.
Um, NO, yeah, I think, I think this is,
these are the core things and I think all
of them uh together gives you the, the essence
of the approach which sometimes is referred to as
direct perception. Which is usually misinterpreted, uh, basically means
that if there's information enough in, in the, in
the energy arrays that surround you, you know, light,
chemicals, whatever, uh, you don't need, uh, some mediating
steps in order to, to perceive your Environment so
in that sense you are, you are directly connected
to your, to your, to your, to your environment
through your senses and not, you know, and not
through a representation internal model, etc.
OK. So could you tell us just a little
bit more about affordances because for people who might
not be familiar with these kinds of concepts, I
mean, what are affordances exactly to explain them a
little bit more.
And affordance, uh, according to James Gibson is an
opportunity of interaction with the environment. So, uh, you
can think about it like among the things that
we, that we perceive, you know, uh, let's, let's
be pluralistic here, right? We are able to perceive
things, right, uh, chairs, uh, uh, TVs, whatever things,
right, but among the things that we perceive are
the things that we can do with things, right?
So I, uh, perceive this glass and I also
perceive that they can uh grab it, right? I,
I, I perceive a door and I can see
whether I can open it or not, right? That
kind of thing. So the things I can do
with. The with the elements around me are affordances,
right? I can step in uh the ground. I
can walk through the ground but not through water,
right? So, uh, the ground is walkable, uh, it
affords walkability while, uh, uh, water doesn't for us,
right? There are some other organisms that that that
can actually walk there, right? So those are affordances,
right? The things we can do with things and
according to ecological psychologists, we can perceive them and
we can perceive them without. The need to do
any the any, any inferential steps. So it's not
that we perceive the object and somehow then we
do other mental operations, so we infer that we
can do something with that object. But that we
directly uh perceive what we can do with things.
Again directly here means that there's information enough in
the surrounding energies of the, of the organism in
light, in uh chemicals in air that tell us,
hey, you can do this. Basically, and those are
the affordances, the things you can do around you.
OK. So, let, let me ask you now a
little bit about embodied cognition. In what way is
the psychological psychology connect to it?
Well, I would say that, uh, historically speaking, Ecological
psychology probably invented embody cognition for psychology. I mean,
the first scientific theory in psychology that We can
say it's actually an embodied theory of cognition. It's
probably ego a psychology in, in, so it doesn't,
so the one that really is the first that
takes the body seriously so that the body is
part, is part of this planetary uh uh machinery
of the theory is ecological psychology and body cognition.
It's something that emerged later, but the first instance
of that, it, it's probably like a psychology. No,
I would say that. For example, I mean, the,
in the 90s, uh there's this book by Elena
Roche, uh Evantonsson and Abella was the Embodied Mind,
which is the, the, I think it's one of
the first book that starts speaking about embody cognition,
but Ecodea psychology was in, uh, was already in
the 60s and in '79 or so it's. So
historically speaking, I would say that Ecoleca is the
first embodied theory of commission that there is.
Uh, AND by the way, does it also relate
to the other three E of 4E cognition and
embedded, uh, extended and enacted cognition or is it
just with embodied cognition?
I'm, I, I like these questions because I have
uh ongoing discussions with many friends about the 4E,
right, uh, which is embodied, embedded and acted, extended
something like that and I don't like that name,
uh, in, in, and, uh, and this is only
my opinion. I, this doesn't mean it's Miguel's opinion
too, uh, uh, I think you, did you, did
you, you, you only need one E which is
ecological actually, right? I mean. What other aspects of,
of the ecological approach that we have maybe not
stressed enough, is that for ecological psychologists, the Psychological
unit. So the, the, the, the, the unit you,
you need to look at in order to understand
psychological process is the organist environment system. So when
you try to understand perception action, you don't look
just at the organism. You look at the organism
environment system as a whole, right? As a self-organized
whole that, that exhibits that, that kind of thing.
But once you have that, once you have that
approach, you are by default. Embodied, embedded, extended and,
and, and as Miguel has been saying action is
a central part of it moving around is a
central part of it. You are also an active.
So basically, ecological psychology 1 E.
Uh, TO rule them all, to rule them all.
Uh,
YEAH, you know, once you, once you take, so
to speak, the ecological stance, you are by default
embodied embedded and active and extended.
Uh, BUT, uh, I mean, uh, when you, when
you mentioned ecological psychology as an E, I mean,
would it be 1/5 E
or just, just one e we take off the
other 4 and cognition.
OK,
OK, fair, to be fair, I, I, I, I
mean, I'm, I think, um. Just to, just to
give a point of, of the, of the sociology
of science here. Uh, TO be fair, ecological psychologists
and, and activists, and people that work in these
paradigms are kind of in a, in a, in
a, in a, in a, in a great great
minority, right? And we sometimes spend a lot of
time arguing among us on how to be a
good an activist or a good ecological psychologist and
how we are different from each other. So many
times I just uh refer to all of us
as radical embodiment. Um, JUST to try to be
open, of course we disagree and, and if we
sit with an activist, we, we are going to
disagree about this, this, this and that. But generally
speaking, you know, like we are very few people,
so maybe 5 Es or whatever is you wanna
have, but it's better that we work together than
against each other.
Yeah, by the way, explain that radical embodiment, right?
What what does that mean?
Um, I, I mean, um, this is, this comes
from, uh, uh, to me, basically from Tony Chamero's
book Radical Embodied Cognitive Science. Uh, Tony Chamero is,
is, is, is my PhD advisor, right? So I'm
very influenced by him. But in this book, uh,
Tony recovers that, that phrase, right, radical embodied cognitive
science from Andy Clark. Andy Clark, uh, before said,
you have people that do, uh, embodied cognitive science
like, like, like Andy Clark himself, and then you
might have other people who do radical things, right?
But he was like, we don't know if Anybody
is doing this. And then Tony's book is like,
no, look, there are people that have been doing
radical embodied cognitive science for the last 40 years,
and those are ecological psychologists and at least some
an activists, right? And, and, and Tony develops why
he thinks that and, and that's and he actually
explicitly tries to, to build bridges between, you know,
ecological psychology and activists and maybe some other, uh.
Radical, uh, approaches to embody the cognition. So I,
so I thought that radical embodiment is a good
umbrella term, uh, for all of us, right? uh,
BECAUSE it doesn't point to any of us. It
doesn't require, uh, you know, uh. 100 words to
explain who we are or like, and I think
it's a, it's a good thing. So to be
radically embodied in In summary just means that you,
you not only think that the body uh influences
uh uh cognition you think that body and environment
are substantive uh considerative parts of the cognitive system.
I know that uh constituive here can be a
little bit uh tricky, but the thing is that
when you think about the cognitive system, you think
about the brain-body environment system. Hm.
And I'll tell you about the, if, if you
allow me, so about the, the whole point of,
of radical embodiment. So there are two ways to
approach that. So there is one way to Characterize
radical embodied cognitive science that is purely negative, which
is where, well, it's people doing ego psycho doing
science without representation. So it's kind of a characterizing
radical embodiment by what we are not doing according
to some people. But actually something that Vicente and
I try to defend and we defend. We have
done in many different, uh, with audiences that no,
actually doing radical embolic cognition, uh, implies a lot
of positive things that we do, a lot of
new expiratory methods. So it's not that we are
doing traditional uh cocis without our representations, that we
are introducing new methods. That are not there and
were not dead in the 80s, 90s. I mean,
there, I mean, the, the classical co science. I
mean, you take uh a textbook on co science
nowadays, I, I mean, I'm, now I have one
in front of me. You open it and you
don't see anything of that. So what we are
not doing, so we're not doing just traditional code
signs with uh mental maps or, or uh mental
observations. We're actually introducing new explanatory methods and uh
techniques of analysis. That's. NEEDED to be recognized as
well, I think.
Right, and all the psychological psychology relate then to
dynamical systems theory.
Well it's probably more a question for Vicente, which
is the expert on dynamical
systems. This is, this also has a story, uh,
you know, during, during, during, during the 70s, a
few young scholars at the time uh were related
to James uh Gibson, you know, like postdocs or,
you know, or research visitors and that stuff. Uh,
TWO of them were, for instance, Dave Lee, who
afterwards worked at the University of Edinburgh and is
the main developer of, uh, of the tau theory,
which is one of the main, uh, theories within,
within the ecological approach, but also Michael Tarvie, uh,
who is basically the leading figure of ecological psychology
after Gibson and And after, after he died like
a couple of years ago, actually last year, uh,
why, why, while we were writing the book actually,
um, um. And both of them, but especially Michael
Tarvie was interested in motor control. Gibson was also
Interested in motor control in action, but he was
leaning towards uh perception more while Michael Tarvi was
someone that who came from motor control to ecological
psychology and he already came uh being kind of
a uh um dissident within the motor control uh
community because he was very. Interested on um in
a theory by Nicola Burstein, which is a Russian
uh physiologist, uh, that thinks basically that, uh. Motor
behavior is some, to some degree self-organized and not
fully commanded from, from, from uh the brain and
you know, there's, it is coordinated before it gets
commanded. You know, there are a few, a few
things there that, that, that I don't want to
get into but the, but the main idea is
that this idea that Uh, motor control is to
some degree self-organized between brain, body, and environment fits
very well with the, with the, with the organized
environment system and with the ecological approach in which,
you know, our psychological features are also self-organized in
some ways, right? So with Michaelar be coming into
this, uh, they were trying to find new methods.
And it started in the late 70s, they start
thinking about synergies, which is our com are this
kind of self-organized uh combination of parts within the
brain body environment system. Uh THEY call them at,
at the beginning um uh coordinative structures and they
are starting to try to find mathematical tools to
deal with them. Uh, AND in this uh context,
uh, some other figures get into that. Peter Kugler
is very important, uh, Scott Kelso, it's also um
works with ecological psychologists in the, in the, in,
in the early 80s developing these ideas, although he
then goes his own way, some ways. And yeah,
during the 80s, they find that dynamical systems, which
is just a mathematical tool that some people use
in some aspects, you know, in the statistical physics,
in some, in some places. Um, It was a
good thing to was a, was a good tool
to study collective behavior. Uh, SOMEHOW self. Organized mathematically.
And yeah, and during the 80s, ecological psychologists along,
along with Kelso and with uh Schoner and some
other people are the first one that start up
trying to apply those dynamical systems or methods to,
to, to behavior, right? To, to how we, we
organize our, our action. And since then it's been
uh along with. Several tools to, to perform time
series analysis. Uh, DYNAMICAL systems theories is one of
the main tools within the, the ecological approach since
then.
So, uh, let me ask you then, does ecological
psychology stand in opposition to uh representationalist slash computationalist
approaches to the, to cognition?
Well, that's actually a very difficult question to answer
because the more you study representational theories of, of
cognition, the more you see that there's also not
one thing. I mean, there are many different uh
options to, to, there are many versions, there are
many flavors, so to speak, of representations out there.
So Uh, I think what ecological psychologists are against
too is the idea that you need uh mental
models of the environment in your brain so. Now
it's true that there are more and more deflationary
accounts of mental representations there that some, some of
them are even like just neural activity that correlates
with some external states. So I guess the answer.
Depends on how Complex you think mental presentations are.
So again, if you, if you know uh take
a paper on, on, uh, cognitive neuroscience about mental
about representations, you see that the no representation is
actually quite weak. To the point, as I said,
to the point that they, they, it's just neural
activity that correlates with some external state of affairs.
Well, if that's your notional representation, then I, I
don't think anyone can be. Against that because it's
that thing, is that minimal that No one would
deny that. That's why I, we wouldn't want to,
we, we don't, we didn't want, sorry to, to
put too much emphasis on representations in our book
because we think it's not really uh uh and
that an easy topic. So no, I know what
they think they would say, but that's, I, I,
I have uh my problems with these questions because
I'm not, I'm not sure how to answer it
actually.
Yeah, I, I, I, I'm kind of, kind of
the thing. I, I think. That the, the rejection
of at least some kinds of representation is a
consequence of the ecological approach but it's not a
core uh aspect of it, right? Uh, um, I
think there's a very uh a very simple way
to see that which is like even though there
are ecological psychologists and some people around them that
uh using ecological psychologists have. Have developed strong claims
against mental representations. One example we've talked about him
a few times, Tony Chamero, it's a very clear
example of that, but not the only one, right?
Uh, IF you read Gibson in 1979, the most
famous book, right, the, the ecological approach to visual
perception, he talks nothing about representations. He uses the
word twice to talk about pictures, you know, like,
like, uh, actually, so it was not a part
of his own thinking because representations, uh, uh, I
think this is the history is good here. Gibson
is not an old man, right? It's, it's, he,
he, he, he was all for the, for our
mentors, right? For, for the, for the, for the
big figures of, of the film now, right? He
got his PhD in 1920. People were not talking
about there, there were not representation wars there, you
know, like, uh, it's, it's like, so he, he
was just not interested in that. But now, you
know, after the cognitive revolution takes place. Um, Well,
if you are an ecological psychologist and, and, and
you start dealing with the new words and one
of them is computation, the other one is representation,
you will eventually end up in some form of
anti-representationalist. What form was what, as Miguel said, depending,
but uh it's more, it's more of a consequence
or it's more of a thing like you can
use, you can use ecological psychology to develop a
theory against mental representations or against some mental representations.
But I don't think that clay is core to,
to, to the ecological approach.
Yeah. And the same of course with, with computation.
I mean, there's a very cool paper when he
the idea that computation is a, a motif, no,
like a musical motif, and that tells you basically
that computation is not a natural kind. It's not
a well-defined concept in cognitive science either. So competition
means, means very different things for very, very complex,
highly abstract with Something that doesn't seem so problematic.
So it really depends on what your definition and
characterization of mental representation is and computation is that
we will be uh More inclined to agree or
more inclined to disagree, but I also agree with
this, it's a consequence of the paradigm and not
necessarily uh uh beginnings or uh uh uh starting
claim of that.
Mhm. So earlier I asked you a little bit
about the history of ecological psychology. What is its
current status? How does it look nowadays?
Yeah, that's actually a good, a good question. So
in the, in the book, we somehow identify 4
different trends that are now being explored. The first
one is ecological neuroscience, which uh Vicente is one
of the leading figures among others with the Main
the beat or You know, people that are trying
to, OK, let's gonna bring back uh the nervous
system in the story that was somehow neglected for
uh most part of the, of the history of
the paradigm. There are also like people from early
200 working on social coordination and how we uh
understand and interact others and how we can uh
build social uh synergies. Also, there are people uh
working on, on how to apply ecological psychology to
motor rehabilitation and skill acquisitions. So there are people
working, for example, on how to apply ecological psychology
principles to um physical training, like, for example, applying
to uh football or applying to uh basketball to
many different sports. That also brings back the, for
example, for collective sports, the social coordination approach. There
are also people like, like me or Harry Heft
uh interested in, in making space for uh cultural
and social normativity in the theory and also like
people working on um technological applications like sensory substitution.
So there are actually many different uh approaches that
are being developed there. So I know this can't
remember any other
when I think about it is like. We are,
uh, I think we are kind of as good
or as bad as always. Um, AGAIN, ecological psychology
has been the other psychology or part of the
other psychology, so it's minority. We are very few
people doing this, um. In kind of in a,
in a constant struggle for survival, right? Because we,
we need in almost any venue we need to
justify that we exist, right? Um, I call it
sometimes the ecological handicap. EVERY talk I give that
is not for ecological psychologists. I need to spend
like at least 20% of it justifying why I'm
doing this, what ecological uh psychology is, right? And
then, um, so, uh. I like to say sometimes
that in some ways we've lost the battle, right?
Um, COGNITIVE psychology is so dominant everywhere, right? Um,
THAT we are a very small, uh, a very
small paradigm, but having lost it, uh, there are
like 50 years of continuous empirical research, right? So
I think we are surviving and hopefully, you know,
uh, us also. I think cognitive science and cognitive
neuroscience is reaching some limits on ecological validity and
that kind of stuff. I think they are looking
out for tools to try to, to be more,
you know, to, to, to, to make more sense
of the whole organism and the environment in our
experiments and in the and I, and I think
it has, uh, something to, uh, to say there,
so.
So, I mean, when it comes to what we
could consider to be more mainstream in psychology and
particularly in cognitive psychology, uh, ecological psychology is not
that, right? I mean, it's not. Mainstream at all.
It's, it's, it's super minoritary. I would say that
most people, if, if you go to any cognitive
cognitive psychology or cognitive neuroscience department, random one and
you ask a random uh person that do you
know ecological psychology, the standard is no. And whoever
knows I've heard about it, but yeah, no, no.
Yeah, mhm.
And so this is some kind of very strange
phenomenon that for all, we, we have many, many
friends that work, uh, doing empirical research in like
a psychology and I've heard this story many times
that for them it's easier to get grants in
philosophy than, than in psychology. So it's easier for
them to get a Funds to do psychology they
apply to philosophy grants and to do it in
psychology because when they, they apply to psychology grants,
they usually get some uh psychologists who come to
science from very mainstream and say, well, you know,
we, and the, the usual response is, well, we
all know that coal psychology is either a form
of behaviorism, so it's dead, or we all, we
all know it doesn't, it doesn't work on what
is psychological psychology. So are the three default answers
that they, they get. So that's
Yeah, and how successful has ecological psychology been experimentally?
This is a question I think very successful given
that only a few people are. Doing that, right?
So, so in, in broad numbers, there's no comparison.
There's maybe only a few 100 ecological psychologists in
the, in the, in the world right now, right?
What you are going to be able, able to
be funding tens of thousands of, of uh cognitive
psychologists slash neuroscientists, right? So, given that the small
community and that those, those difficulties for funding and,
you know, and, and to get published sometimes. Etc.
I think, you know, again, you, you have an,
an steady stream of empirical work since, since the
mid-seventies as uh uh up to, up to date.
So I think it's, it's uh there's experimental success
there. Um. Although experimental success is always difficult to,
to evaluate, uh, because The thing is that would
a cognitive psychologist take uh experiment in ecological psychology
to be successful? In, in what sense, right? Like,
like we are critical with some of the experiments
cognitive psychologists think are successful. I think they, they
would be critical, um, with us, so yeah.
Now, do you have anything to add to that
doctor or to,
no, no, no, I, I, I was about to
say that, that, that the, the question is difficult
to, to answer because it's difficult to measure, uh,
empirical success. I mean, in the ecological psychology paradigm,
yes. If you ask someone outside, they would say
no. Yeah.
Uh, AND how do you look at the future
of ecological psychology?
Well, I'm, I'm optimistic actually. I'm, I'm optimistic that
uh new people are The fact is that ecological
psychology is not dead. It's not dead because uh
every year new students come, uh, every year, I
mean, some people get keep getting grants and keep
getting, uh getting new students, people interested. So I,
I wouldn't say it's dead. So I'm, I'm in
a way, I'm, I'm optimistic. Do I believe ec
psychology is gonna, is gonna become the new mainstream
now. I don't believe that. I mean we are
far away from this universe actually. But I think
there are a lot of uh interesting and cool
people doing really interesting work, um, applying uh ecological
principles to, to many different areas and also bringing
into ecological psychology, uh, explanatory tools and uh techniques
that were not there before. So in a way,
I'm, I'm, I'm quite optimistic about the future.
And uh how do you go about integrating it
with neuroscience?
Um This is, this is, uh, the thing I've
spent the last 10 years trying to do, kind
of, uh. Um, Ecological psychology has been Generally ignoring
neuroscience for some reasons that we don't, I, I
don't think we need to get into, but there
were some particular reasons why the leading figures of
ecological psychology for years didn't really pay attention to
physiology in general or, or at least to neurophysiology.
Um, But in the last year, in the last
10 years or so there have been a few
people that we've been trying to, to, to think
of, OK, if the brain is not in the
business or in the business of building up an
internal model of the external environment, what is the
business, what is the brain doing here, right? Uh,
WHAT, what's the, what's, what's, what's the role and
how can we study it? And so my, in,
in my, in my own work, I recover uh
the notion of resonance. Um BASICALLY, James Gibson says
what the brain is doing is not building up
an internal model but resonating to uh to ecological
information, which is that reads information in the stimulation,
right? So, of course he uses in some metaphorical
way, but he takes it from Lashley, which is
a neurophysiologist in the, in the early 20th century.
So there are some ideas there, but the, but
the, but the main idea is that what the
brain is doing is somehow coupling to that information,
right? So it's reshaping its its own dynamics uh
with respect to that information. And that's uh the
basic idea that I've, uh, labeled that psychological resonance
as to refer to this particular thing, you know,
what's, uh, how, how the, how the dynamics of
neural activity get coupled or shaped or entangled to
ecological information. Um, So by, by doing this, I
think you get what ecological psychologists would like, right,
which is like uh Uh, a way to talk
about brain activity without saying that brain activity is
modeling, representing, uh, building up. Anything but, you know,
but having its own dynamics, which is uncontroversial and
through the interaction with the environment, those dynamics get
coupled to, to something that is already there, right,
which is the, the ecological information. Um, AND so
this has been theoretical work on my part and
I've been the last 5 years or so trying
to do experimental work on that. We have already
a print out and we have some other works
that are going on by people like Ruth Vander
Van der Bell and Audrey van der Meer that
are doing really, really cool work using EG uh
to explore brain dynamics and to see whether there's
this, this, this resonance, right? Um, MYSELF with, with
the Professor Klaus, Klaus Grahaman at the at the
Technical University of, uh, Berlin, we, we have, again,
we set that, we set up an experiment that,
that combines uh virtual. Reality and and eye tracking
and Mo EG trying to explore this kind of
stuff. And of course there are other people like
Miguel said Matthew the which are doing other cool
stuff. Lou Louis Favela has this book The Ecological
Brain in which uh you have some form of,
you know, um um an understanding of ecological neuroscience
as we could call it. Uh, FROM the point
of view of computational neuroscience and other methods, manifolds,
that kind of stuff. So I think this is,
this is a trend that, that we are trying
to build up and, and uh I think it's
going to keep growing in the next few years.
Also because importantly people in cognitive neuroscience departments. Uh,
WANT to have experiments that are ecologically valid, so
they are interested in how the hell can we
include the environment in our experiments. If, if any
of you have ever been in an, in an,
in an FMRI, the FMRI is a very weird
place, right? And it's not a very naturalistic uh
way to understand that, right? You are, you are
laying there with a lot of noise, not moving
the head, right? Like, so what can we do?
To try to be more, more ecological, right? More
including our own body and the things we do
and the, and the environment in this, and there
are already many labs that are trying to do
this. I'm familiar, for instance, with, with, with the,
the lab of Jodi Cola at Western University in
Canada. Uh, THEY invented this kind of trade to,
to show actual objects to the, to, to, to
the FMRI people, right? And you know, trying to
include not pictures but objects is already a step.
Towards a more realistic environment, right? And as the
whole field moves that way, I think they are
going to find interesting stuff within ecological psychology even
if they don't buy the whole package, right? So
I think it's um. Good years um ahead of
us.
Yeah. By the way, you mentioned Doctor Favela's book,
The Ecological Brain. I actually have an interview with
him about that book on the show. So if
people are interested, you can go and watch it.
Uh, BUT I mean, do, do you think, or
do you have the sense that neuroscientists, uh, take
ecological psychologists more seriously than cognitive psychologists do, or
not? Um. I don't think so. Uh. It is
interesting, like, like there's a, there's a last week,
uh, a new grant was announced, um, $10 million
for 8 years to study ecological neuroscience. Uh, AND
they, and they explicitly refer like that they were
inspired by ecological psychology, blah blah blah, but no
single ecological psychologist was part of that grant, right?
Which is, I mean, uh, so when you say
that some people can hear oh that there, therefore
the ground is bad. No, the ground is awesome,
right? It's very cool, successful cognitive neuroscientists that are
trying to explore according to them how affordances are
encoded and represented in the brain. Of course, for
a, for, for a, for, for an ecological psychologist,
this is not the right way to look, to
look uh at affordances, right? We, we've been telling
that affordances are there. Uh, PRECISELY, uh, to try
to avoid the need to, you know, to have
internal models representations. But anyways, I think this is
a good step, right? It's, it's, it's the whole
field moving towards ecological uh concepts and this is
good. And I think they are going to do
cool stuff and they are going to, to read
more ecological psychology and we are going to be
more visible in some ways. Now. Again, are they
doing that by including us, so, so to speak,
or including the people that have been doing ecological
neuroscience for years now? Not really, right? So do
they Pay more attention. Not really, but, but I
think my point here is more like it's unavoidable
given, given the limits they are facing in terms
of ecological validity and the naturalization of their experiments.
Ecological psychology or something in that camp is going
to become unavoidable.
Right. So, another thing that you talk about in
your book is the study of social coordination. Uh,
I mean, first of all, what is social coordination
and can it be studied through ecological psychology?
Yeah, well, I can. I mean, uh, it kind
of has been studied for, for decades already. I
mean, the work on Mike Richardson, Kerry Mars, and
there are many people working on, on that um
are really inspired by some remarks by James and
Gibson. The social coordination is our ability. TO act
with others, for example, to form dyadics or to,
to collaborate in in tasks, to play sports with
others. So it involves our, our ability to understand
what the others are doing and to understand what,
what we have to do to contribute to this
uh group action, right? And the idea here is
that uh you should be able to study social
coordination the same way you study individual coordination with
the environment. So there should be information about the
environment and about the others that specifies what you
can do there. So how you can behave. What
options you have, etc. So basically the principles are
the same. The only difference is that instead of
uh speaking about a person and a material environment,
so to speak, we're, we're speaking about different people
acting together in a material environment. So there is
information about the objects and information about what the
others are doing. And that the, the quality of
uh colega in correlations, it's actually a very good
example of uh successful research doing chole psychology with
dynamical systems theory. So once you introduce more people
there, then the to introduce dynamical system is obvious.
You need to have like a lot of uh
differential equations and temporal analysis because otherwise impossible.
Mhm. So there's one last uh topic that I
would like to ask you about. Uh, HOW about
the study of culture? I mean, is there space
for the study of culture within ecological psychology?
Well, I, I guess that's uh that's my turn
to. Well, I think it, it must, it has
to be based there. So unless you believe human
perception and action is completely secluded from cultural influences
and social influences, unless you believe that and be
my guest if you believe that. Unless you believe
that, then you need to have some space for
that. The question is how, that's the big, that's
the big, the same way as, as was saying,
well, unless you believe that the brain doesn't play
any role in perception and motor control, then you,
the question is how, what is the role of
the brain? OK, then the same question applies here.
So what is the role of culture? What is
the role of the role of social normativity? How
does it, how does is involved here? How does,
how do social norms affect the way we perceive
and interact with affordances? Well, there's a question that
for many years too was also like ignored by
psychologists uh until uh people like Uh, it was
already mentioned in some of the words of Eleanor
and, and James Gibson, but then Edward Reed, uh,
especially Harry Heft, is the one who, uh, uh,
was more interested in that, and now I'm working
on that also like inspired by Heft and in
constant, uh, debate with him. So we're trying to,
to understand how, uh, social norms and cultural norms
can influence perception and action. And there are different
options, different Possibilities. There is also like this um
uh work um um values, uh, do you remember
the name of uh oh. I'm sorry, I, I
can't remember the name of the, of the researcher
working on that, but yeah, there is, there are
different options, different people working on, on the, on
the topic.
Right. So, uh, I mean, Doctor Raja, is there
anything you'd like to add to that or?
Um, YEAH, I mean, I, I think, uh, um,
It is, it is difficult to think about how
ecological psychology can get to that. It should, I
agree with, with, with, with uh Miguel. I think
it is going to change when it happens, um.
Uh I don't know how it is going to
change, uh, but, but I think, yeah, uh. The
thing is that it is also possible that ecological
psychology is just not enough and that's OK too.
Uh. Um, Human psychology and animal psychology and maybe
plant psychology as as Miguel and I have, have,
have worked on, uh, sometimes it's super complex, it's,
it's super, you know, intruncated. Maybe we cannot. We
cannot explain everything with just one theory, right? Uh,
I'm, if I, if I, if I swear some
alliance in the psychological camp, my alliance is to,
is to, is to, is to Will and James,
and he basically says that in the principles of,
uh, psychology, right? Like the, he says, uh, something
like, um. The, the, you know, the, the, the
boundaries of what is mental are, are blurry. It's
better to not to be pedantic and to leave
our side uh as, as, as, uh, blurry too,
right? Like as open-ended kind of thing. So, so
yeah, I, I, I mean, I think, I think
at least at least ecological psychologists eventually should have
something to say about it, even, even if what
if what is to say is that we are
not enough.
OK, so any last uh message uh Doctor Orin
or can we wrap it up?
No, I don't have any final remark or anything.
OK, psychology is alive and that's what some people
seem to believe,
and we have a book, a short book about
it, so you can say that, yeah,
yeah, yeah, uh, it's psychological psychology. I'm leaving a
link within the description down below and, uh, where,
just before we go, where can people find your
work on the internet, Doctor Martin and Doctor Raja.
Well, I guess they can, they can buy from
the Cambridge University press website. Uh, ALSO they can
email us and we can send them some pre
like pre-print version of those ones that are, that
we are actually allowed to share officially. And yeah,
I mean, we, we try to publish as many
papers as possible to open access because we think
that people should be able to read it without
having to pay subscription to journals or being Affiliated
to universities that have those subscriptions. But anyway, I,
I always like Encourage people, my students. I, I,
what I tell them is that, well, you know,
researchers, Write papers to be read. I mean, it's
not that we write papers to just to be
online. So if you can't find a paper, if
you can't access a paper, the best strategy usually
is to contact the researcher, uh her or himself,
because they are actually happy to send you. I
mean, there's no point to to write a paper
for if no one can read it. So if
people can't access our paper, then please contact us
because we will be more than happy to send
you everything that we can and we
have.
Yeah. OK, great. So thank you both so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
I really like the book and it goes in
line with other interviews I've done recently on dynamical
systems theory, ecological psychology as well. So thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show. Thank you for having us. Yeah, thank
you. Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it, leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by Nights Learning
and Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon
or PayPal. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and PayPal
supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche
Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim
Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then
the Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant Ju Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londonorea. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin. And yoursnacht, a special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.